hey there I'm Jason guts and you're
listening to think again a big Fink
podcast since the early days of the
public internet big think has curated
more than 10,000 powerful ideas and
shared them through video text and
social media the think again podcast
takes us in a different direction out of
our comfort zone surprising me and my
guests with conversation topics we
didn't necessarily come here prepared to
discuss I'm very happy to be here today
with jodi pico she's the number one New
York Times bestselling author of 23
novels including leaving time the
storyteller lone wolf and my sisters
keeper Jody's latest novel small great
things has deep personal resonance for
her and has been many years in the
making it deals with racism in America
today both in the explicit form of a
white supremacist character and the
implicit racism that results from class
privilege welcome to think again Joe D
thank you so much so um I mean I guess
let's start with the elephant in the
room which is that we are two white
people here about to talk about racism
in America I sort of wish that we had a
person of color with us tana Hussey
coats or Jelani Cobb who's gonna be here
later in the week to kind of Bounce
these things off of two but but so we
will come at it from where we're coming
at it from but I may I wonder if you
know if you want to start with an
overview of a brief overview of what the
book is about and then a little bit
about why it was important to you to
write sure you haven't yeah yeah I'm
actually gonna flip the order of that
good so 25 years ago I really wanted to
write about racism I tend to write about
the things that upset me the most and I
had been living in New York City when
there was an undercover african-american
cop who was shot four times in the back
by his white colleagues even though he
was wearing the color of the day which
signified him as an undercover cop this
happened on the subway it totally upset
me and I started to write a book and I
tried really really hard and I failed
and it was because I couldn't create an
authentic voice I couldn't create an
authentic story and you know I really
second guessed myself saying as you just
brought up what right do I have as a
white woman to write about racism when
I've had all the privilege in the world
growing up right and I stepped away from
it and over the years I would I would
question myself kind of playing devil's
advocate and i would say okay well wait
a second you know you write all the time
in the voice of people you're not you
write as men you write as rape victims
you ride this Holocaust survivors as
school shooters you're none of those
people either so what is different about
this and you know it took me a while to
realize what is different about this is
racism it's very hard to talk about
without offending someone and so as a
result many of us choose not to speak
about it at all right so fast forward to
2012 and again i found another news
story that captures my attention it is a
nurse an african-american nurse in
michigan who has 25 years of labor and
delivery experience she helps deliver a
baby and out in the aftermath the father
of the baby calls it her supervisor and
says I don't want her or anyone who
looks like her to touch my kid and he
pushes up his sleeve to reveal a
swastika tattoo he was a skinhead in
their infinite wisdom and I say that in
quotes the hospital put a post-it note
in the baby's file saying no African
American personnel to touch this infant
the nurse wound up suing she settled out
of court I hope she got a giant payout
but it made me think well what if what
if I could push the envelope and create
a novel around this what if there was
this African American nurse that this
happened to but she was the only person
in the room when something happened to
the baby what if she had to choose
between following her supervisors orders
or saving this baby's life what if as a
result of that she winds up on trial
with a white public defender who like me
like many of my friends would never call
herself a racist and what if I could use
those three voices the african-american
nurse the white public defender and the
white supremacist to tell the story and
to have them all challenge their beliefs
about race and privilege and power and
it was like this aha moment for me I
suddenly knew i was going to actually be
able to finish this book and the reason
was twofold my intent was different and
my audience was different right I wasn't
trying to write a story about racism to
tell people of color how hard their
sorry like you said I have no right to
do that and that never will be my story
to tell right but I was writing because
I needed to tell other white people hey
you know it's really easy to point to
the skinhead and say oh there's a racist
it's a lot harder to point to yourself
and say the same thing and yet you know
because racism isn't just about
prejudice it's also about power and
privilege we are part of the problem as
white people even if we're not talking
about it not choosing to talk about race
is a privilege in and of itself right I
mean you have a very big and like
mainstream audience in America among
whom I would imagine there are a lot of
white people who might be uncomfortable
as you know even some of the white
people I grew up around are with
tanahashi coats his latest book and any
any you know black lives matter and
whatever and who when these things are
discussed just start saying well that so
you know get very defensive totally and
you know it's funny I've already done a
couple of interviews for this book and I
literally spent a three-hour trip from
one venue at one event to another
basically doing personal social justice
workshops over email with white men who
were upset with some of the things that
said and you know that's okay because
one of the first things you learn when
you when you start studying racial
justice which is new to me you know this
is a journey I just started and God
knows I have a long way to go but we're
all at different points and that's okay
and you know one of the first things you
learn is that it is important to talk to
your own kind and just like tanahashi
coats in his brilliant book makes it
very clear that this is intended for
people of color right you know I guess
what I'm saying is the audience I'm
trying to really reach here would be
like you said those white people who I
think really do want to enter this
conversation and do want to make the
world a better place but don't have the
vocabulary or the wherewithal to know
how to start talking about racism yeah
no I mean we would want I guess though
to get to a point where we don't have to
think about like being one kind or
another is no talking to yeah we're so
far away from the problem and
the thing that gets me the most is like
you know honestly when I and I judge
myself to I should say this I I don't
mean to judge anybody else because I was
this person a couple years ago but
people often white people up I that I
meet say things that they think are the
right thing to say but that couldn't be
more wrong right like this is in your
book these sort of like death by a
thousand cuts micronus white white
friends who are saying thanks to her one
of my favorite lines in the book is when
Ruth narrates and says white people
don't mean have half the stupid things
that come out of their mouths you know
right and that's great because it is
true and and honestly people of color
cut us a lot of slack all the time you
know but I would love to get to a point
where people of color and white people
can have honest conversations about race
we're not quite there yet and so right
now I think it really is important then
that if you if you are white like I'm
white you know you get to go out and say
to other people who may not have figured
this out yet hey you got to look a
little more closely at yourself it took
me a while because you know I'm half
Jewish and I very much identify with the
Jewish side of my family and I know the
history and I spent a lot of time
thinking about what my ancestors in the
not-too-distant past went through and so
in my 20s i think it was i was living in
DC and i was working at living stage
which is a social outreach arm of arena
stage alcohol and we were doing
workshops um then and the cast were
mostly black and Latino and I was sort
of in like a peripheral support kind of
ambiguous role yeah and there'd be like
workshops with you know mostly black
kids from DC and it was you know it was
uncomfortable like coming to terms with
like a what is my role in this situation
do I even belong here do I have anything
to say or add but also with just
systemic racism and the fact that like
you can't help it right totally and you
know it's really there are a couple
things I would say to that the first is
that being put in those situations where
you're not in the majority in a room is
so important and a lot of white people I
don't think they ever have that
opportunity or they don't they'll go out
of their way to make that opportunity
one of my favorite things to do is to be
on tour in South Africa
because although there certainly are
still a lot of white people in South
Africa when you look around the media
fair and you look at billboards and
posters and magazines the standard of
beauty is very much a black standard of
beauty right which is so cool I mean I I
just always feel wow this is very
otherworldly to me when I'm down there
and I like it yeah but by the same token
one of the first times that I was in a
space where I was not in the majority
was at this racial justice workshop that
I went to and of course I went in there
thinking I'm a good person open-minded
you know right and I left every night in
tears for me the most moving parts of
the workshop really hearing stories of
situations I will never have to live
right so like there was this one girl
who is an asian american girl who talked
about her love-hate affair with eyeliner
and how she was in tears talking about
how she couldn't use it easily on her
own features but that was the standard
of beauty in which she grew up and there
was another young woman who was an
african-american woman who talked about
how exhausting it is to wake up every
day and to have to put a mask on a
metaphorical mask to be the kind of
black person that white people can
handle and how tiring that was and how
she never was herself and like you know
it was really like light bulbs going off
firecrackers in my head going you have
never had to feel this you will never
have to feel this you know and that that
was really for me a sea change I mean I
just turned 50 ice literally spent you
know 47 years of my life not paying a
lot of attention to race because I
didn't have to one of the other great
things I did when I was researching the
book was talked to multiple women of
color for over a hundred hours of
interview tape right because let's be
realistic I don't have the right to
write the voice of Ruth I never will be
a black woman in America and if I was
going to do it because of what I was
trying to say desperately I had to do my
homework and I met with these unjust
wonderful ladies who basically overlook
my ignorance about their own lives and
spend all this time telling me about
their hopes and their fears and their
successes and their failures there's
this one mom who came in and
you have this baby recently and she
spoke to me and said it was after
another unarmed black man was shot by
the police is the morning after and she
came in all of sentence and how am I
going to protect my son how do I teach
him to grow up and not be black Josh and
how do you answer that you know how on
earth do you answer that and it was like
a devastating beginning to a
conversation these women they vetted the
voice of Ruth for me they read the
manuscript they made changes so that it
would sound as authentic as possible
given that I was a white woman writing
it you know and I couldn't have and
should not have written the book really
without their help yeah I mean black
people in this country have been
explaining for a long time I people
right there going through everything I'm
doing a tour um I've been I've done a
bunch of events so far and at every
event I say to a group of people who are
predominantly white raise your hand if
you know who Rosa Parks's and yeah roll
raises their hand and then I go where's
your hand if you know who Louis Latimer
is mmm and maybe I get one person to
raise their hand and I'm like you go
good for you and then I say with all the
rest of you that's your homework find
out who he is and then ask yourself why
your education to not cover that right
you know and that's really important I
didn't know these things until I started
digging but it is on us it's on us to
start digging it's not up to people of
color to explain it to us totally I mean
the last thing I want to say as you know
a guilty white liberal who is aware of
systemic racism and that and feels very
unhappy about it have especially having
grown up completely obsessed with I mean
that aspect of black modern culture
which is early hip-hop and the stuff i
was listening you know beat street
drinking whatever trying to breakdance
myself as a kid you know and being like
the outsider within my little mostly why
private school you know it's troubling
to me to think that we are into
completely divided cultures and I and I
want like I kind of yearned for that
connection across the lines you know but
I read Tana hussies book and I felt like
okay this is me this is us this is
what's going on with us and you can't
quite understand right so I had a really
interesting experience with tana houses
book because it was another
growth experience for me so I read this
book and I was blown away and I went out
and bought 10 copies gave them out to
people who i thought needed to read them
and i was talking to a friend of mine
who is a woman of color and I said that
book absolutely wrecked me and I said I
really you know I mean out Twitter
everyone's connected so I'm like I want
to write to him and I'm gonna tell him
you know that I really love this book
and it was just about them that he was
tweeting and saying great i'm thrilled
all these white critics of giving me
Awards I do not care like I was like
whoa whoa wait and he said you know
that's awesome um great but this book
was not for you and it was really
interesting so I went back to my friend
I was like I I mean I guess I'm not
gonna write to him now he doesn't care
if I liked it and then and then I
thought you know but what again as a
writer I would certainly want to know
someone like my book and she broke it
all down for me she goes uh can I have
to stop you right there it's not about
you and I was like oh right right but
and that and that whole process there
was like they sort of the ego getting
kind of offended by like why would I
want to talk to me about this you know
and it's like yeah and no it's totally
not right i was like no it's not about
me and yes he did an amazing and then I
kind of SAT back and i SAT with that for
a second and I thought okay no it's not
all about me and to this really made
gave me validation because I was in the
middle of writing this book and I was
like I was sitting here struggling with
the idea that Here I am writing about
racism I'm a white woman I do want to
talk to the people who look like me and
say wake up a little and I'm talking to
my own audience and here I have someone
I very much admire tanahashi coat saying
yes right to your own audience and I was
like okay I learned that from you I'm
gonna do it you know and I felt really
good about it that that makes perfect
sense and that actually is a perfect
segue I'm gonna I'm gonna just read the
last paragraph of something I was just
reading by tanahashi which I think
speaks to why it's so not only okay but
that you wrote your book it's from a
Atlantic article called the Black
Journalists in the racial Mountain and
he says I think there are reasons to
write beyond placing a thumb in the eye
of white liberals who are not our God's
and who are not our slaves and then he
says by the lights of history the
collective white conscience has never
needed self has made no apology
and has proven impervious to the import
of black literature it's almost as the
writers should write for themselves
should Hugh to their own standards and
keep their own conscience instead of
fretting over the feelings of those who
they cannot change and who they do not
control that's really interesting yeah
yeah you know and it's funny because I i
agree with that um this makes me
actually think of lionel shriver and the
controversy yeah yes I've been thinking
about that as we've been preparing yeah
and you know honestly nobody told lionel
shriver in my opinion you can't write
this you can't write other I mean it's
ridiculous to think that anyone would
censor writers a really any color and
say you must write within your own lines
I don't think that's the job of the
writer and I don't actually think anyone
thinks that's the job of the writer and
I really believe that what she was
railing against in totally the wrong way
was was the idea that we should be held
accountable if you are going to write
other you need to ask yourself two
questions you need to say why am I doing
this is it to profit off somebody else's
pain right you know make money off that
and it's not my story but I'm gonna you
know get some green off it or is it
because there's something viscerally I
need to tell and this is the only way I
can do it is by writing this particular
voice right and if that's the answer
then you take you go to step b which is
how can i write a voice that is not mine
with empathy and within sight and with
compassion right that is really all any
author should have to do and should
strive for honestly and even having done
that if someone wants to come and say
you know what you got it wrong then you
got to be ready to deal with that's it
you did it to the kitchen you got it and
you know what I I will i have and i will
continue to and to me that's part of my
message you know i'm willing to kind of
be i'm gonna be the sacrificial lamb
here if you want to have a problem with
something i've written I'm gonna take it
and I'm gonna listen to you and I'm
going to learn from it hopefully or I'm
gonna explain to you why I did what I
did but ultimately one of the things
that keeps white people from talking
about racism is a paralytic fear of
making a mistake right and it's much
more important to talk and know that you
probably will make a mistake and then
apologize learn from it and move forward
than to not say anything at all I agree
one hundred percent and speaking of
talking about things that one
may or may not know anything about that
brings us to the second part of the show
where we listen to the surprise video
clips I say listen because the audience
will hear them but you and I will see
them and discuss them the first one is
by seeing Nicole Mason who I believe is
the social activist and also a novelist
let's see what it is the issue I see
within the election right now is that
we're not having the conversations that
matter to people and families across the
country we have moved so far away from
the bread-and-butter issues that
families want to talk about so we
haven't heard a lot about poverty we
haven't heard a lot in this election
about making sure that we have a strong
social safety net not only for
low-income families but for middle-class
families who are still fragile or
straddling between being financially
secure and close to the edge in terms of
falling into poverty and we're just not
having those conversations we're talking
about things that matter but when we
talk about building a society where all
people have a fair shot we're not
talking about the issues that will make
the difference for them we don't talk a
lot about white poverty and I think we
should because i think if we talked a
lot more about the way poverty impacts
different groups i think we would not
see it as an issue that's out there and
doesn't impact me or it's a black issue
or latino issue we would see it as an
issue of lack and people not having the
resources that they need to be able to
live a quality and productive life what
frightens me is that there's not enough
more responsibility for others in our
society and so we can just turn our back
we can say hey that's not me that
doesn't impact me or that's happening to
them and not to me and not seeing the
connection between us all
what do you thinking is what I'm
thinking is I wish that my husband and
daughter were with me because my husband
works and is on the board of a local
homeless shelter where I live okay and
my daughter spent the summer as a social
work intern working with these families
in poverty okay and you know what I can
tell you is that my book is about a
woman who has been skating right below
the surface of the white upper middle
class for as long as she can even though
she's black right um I'm not he's
educated she got her nursing degree yeah
but everything she's done has an even
living in a white suburb of a diverse
town like New Haven everything she's
done is in the hopes that her son can
have what she considers to be the
perfect life which is actually that's a
whole different issue because what a mom
might think is perfect might not be what
her son would envision to be as perfect
and one of the issues that comes up in
the book is that Edison who is this
young african-american boy who has white
friends and has gone to great schools is
coming up against oh it's okay that
you're my friend but you're not dating
my sister that kind of thing which
happens to a lot of I think kids in that
environment who are our kids of color
what she's talking about though that
really resonated with me was an
intersectionality and one of the things
that when you start to think about
racial justice and you start to think
about systemic and institutional racism
is how you absolutely cannot divorce it
from socio economics right it's
literally like making a peanut butter
jelly sandwich and then trying to take
it apart and getting the jelly and the
peanut butter separate again there's
always going to be a little of some on
the other side in the England of a
couple generations ago this was classism
I mean it's still to some extent is but
like was a majority white society but
you had the sort of unbridgeable class
barriers and and one of the great
arguments that I think you often hear
from privileged people when they are
talking about how clearly we must be in
a post-racial society um which is not
true is that you know well they're poor
white people too well there are poor
white homeless people you know so what
about them well you know there are
studies that have been done on this
and if you are a homeless white person
you still will get more money in your
can then a homeless black person right
and more people on your street of the
street will shy away from a homeless
black man than they would a homeless
yeah and if you really want to take it
to the mat on that argument I mean the
statistics are like extreme you know the
percentage of black Americans living in
poverty is insanely higher than that of
white America exactly eduation rates etc
right and I mean and honestly if you
really want to unpack that you have to
go back to slavery right and the
devastating effects of that on
generations of families yeah you know
and and honestly when you think about a
homeless family that is trying to get
its feet back underneath them you know
their their concept of saving is very
different than what someone in the
middle class is going to have when it
comes to savings they're you know
they're going to be thinking really of
of living hand-to-mouth if you have
extra money resources you buy something
right away with it cuz you may never
have that money again right you know and
so when you begin to compound that by
generations of poverty which you know
grew out really of a post slavery-era
all of a sudden it's exponential I mean
you can't undo the two and what I do
agree with hugely that she says right is
this concept that it is everybody's
problem i'm also going to be the first
one to tell you that we are not talking
about things that matter in the
selection at all yeah a week it would
let's not even begin that i don't know
what um even want to talk about big
things we actually are talking about
exactly but i do think that when she
says this isn't just a black problem i
think that really is is sort of the
entry point that i came into anti-racism
with the idea that when you only hear
people of color talking about racism and
how it affects them in a way and this is
horrible the first one to say this in a
way you've just become almost deaf to it
sure you know it's a little bit like how
honestly like I helped feel about school
shootings there's been so many that they
blend together that is a horrible
horrible sensation and you know and the
same thing when you hear people who are
oppressed complaining about the
oppressions
x you don't listen which is again a
horrible state of affairs sometimes it
takes that one unexpected voice to speak
out that makes you realize wait what and
catches your attention and honestly the
best way that I can describe this i have
my oldest son is gay and I you know
after all all the rhetoric about why
there should be gay rights in this
country right what is it what what makes
people sit up and take notice when a
Republican senator says something you
know cuz it's not what you would expect
the Republican senators say and when he
says yeah we ought to have gay marriage
all of a sudden everyone goes wait what
huh so in a way i do believe exactly
what she says it is everyone's problem I
mean part of this I think is also
America its foundational to America and
to the some aspect of the American dream
right we start as a country of pioneers
of rugged individualists we are not a
collectivist society so ideas of giving
a damn about everybody are to some
extent imported to us via European
socialism leader like it's sort of the
labor movements in the 30s you know in a
way it's like there's something
fundamentally American about being like
damn it I'm gonna take care of my own
and you take care of your own and
nitrite and like that's hard to shake
but it also comes back to that idea of
that American Dream and something you
said earlier about guilt you know this
white guilt right you know there is this
sense that if you if you decide to think
about all of us together instead of just
what's good for me right that you are
losing something you have to give
something up right and you know when you
are white in America you hold all the
advantages who wants to give away the
winning card right but there is this
very subtle and seismic shift in
thinking if you can make yourself
understand that if we tackle out this
together if we begin to unpack and
dismantle racism together we actually
all win right that's the difference but
you know what and that's right and let's
go there in a different way my son who's
eight years old almost nine there's a
homeless woman
maybe she's 35 something like that who
stays in the train station near where we
live and he's befriended her he goes to
her every time hi how are you he talks
to her and I thought I say hi to her as
well but peripheral e because of him it
wouldn't it probably wouldn't have
happened and he asked me the other day
like why can we give her five thousand
dollars for Christmas or something like
can we just fix her thing you know and I
had to like sit there and take a deep
breath and be like why can I why is the
answer no you know because the argument
of like well if we help her and then we
help all of them then we won't have
anything like that doesn't really feel
very satisfying right yeah and that is
that's a really hard again that's a
really hard thing but I'm thinking about
Sammy doing her social work and I've
been saying that you know so much of
success is not one moment of success
especially when you have been in
homeless that it's that the next time
when you fall you fall less deep and the
way that you do that is by having skills
and resources that are given to you or
taught to you in some capacity hopefully
through an organization like the one
that you know that my daughter was
working for so that you can begin to get
your own feet under you and the next
time it's not quite as far fall that
reminds me I actually heard killer Mike
the Atlanta rapper killer Mike was on I
guess this was an older clip from the
colbert report when that was still on
then Colbert was like speaking for all
white people what can we do you know
sort of thing and I think killer Mike
said volunteer to mentor
african-american youth and give them
some of the if they don't have it give
them share with them some of the skills
that you have about like applying to
college and whatever now from my white
guilt perspective that like smacks of
like noblesse oblige don't want to like
I don't want to like ghosts you know I
feel bad about like am I I'm gonna go
rescue everybody but that was what
killer Mike had to say he was like share
some of your white privilege you know
like share the skills yeah I mean I I
tend to think that a really good way to
kind of get get rid of that white guilt
is some think about how
you can't change it you're you're gonna
stay white I hate guilty yeah you're
always going to be way so how can you
use that and in a way that is helpful
and of course if you write like you said
I don't think it is a savior thing I
don't think you're supposed to ever go
in and say let me tell you how to fix
your lives because let me tell you those
communities of color know what they're
doing they've got great leaders on their
own but what here's what you do have
when you're white everybody wants to
listen to your opinion and I don't know
why that is but people actually care
what you have to say and you know
there's this kind of metaphorical
microphone that I think about and if you
are able to as a white person with an
audience in any in any venue even if
it's a board meeting you know and there
are just ten people sitting around the
table if you're able to tap that
metaphorical Mike and say excuse me is
everyone listening great and then pass
it to somebody who's voice isn't hurt or
you know be the guy in the conference
room who says we haven't heard from
so-and-so yet right maybe you know maybe
it is a woman of color in the corner
who's hasn't talked yet because people
are talking over her I don't know but
make sure that other people's voices are
somehow heard one of the things that i
love about going out on a tour for small
great things is that i've been telling
people finish this book and then go
right back to a bookstore and find a
voice of color how often do you read an
author of color there are so many
incredible authors of color and honestly
if you really want to know more about
what it means to be black in america do
not listen to Jody Biko listen to
someone who's been living in right you
know and so the idea that as an author
one of the things I can do with my
privilege is steer people to voices that
they haven't heard it's really important
to me that makes sense shall we see what
the next surprise quite doesn't wake a
North nor can I it is critic aO Scott
and the video is titled our comedians
more intellectual than politicians
I feel like if you want to see you know
anti-intellectualism on full display you
can watch some presidential debates I
mean you can certainly look at look at
our political discourse and see well you
know what thought and intellect is not
held in the highest value and that
concerns me a lot there is you know a
tradition Richard Hofstadter wrote a
book probably 50 years ago now or more
called anti-intellectualism in American
life where he identified this strain in
politics and civic life of you know
mistrust of expertise of suspicion of
knowledge or a thought or of irony or of
nuance and I think in culture in the
arts there's there's a lot of that too
there's a lot of spoon-feeding there's
there's a lot that's just sort of easy
and I think that it's important to
recognize and to reward and encourage
opposition to that which can come in in
different places I mean I think there
are champions of intellect and
intelligence out there in the world a
lot of them are comedians I mean I think
we do live at a time where you know
people like Jon Stewart or Larry Wilmore
or chris rock or Amy Schumer or or Lena
Dunham you know are out there kind of
saying well look let's be smart let's
think let's like not take things for
granted let's not just accept what's
given to us
so I'm actually going to go I think in a
different direction with this you've
said some really interesting things on
like from a twist on this this topic
right so yeah yeah um first thing you
were gonna go there yeah first of all
you know you yeah you used to write for
Wonder Woman so you know the whole like
comic books high culture low culture
divide there you know in American
history and then I know you famously
kind of got into it with or around
Franzen right and the fact that Jonathan
Franzen's book was reviewed twice in the
New York Times what's the style piece
right right week right so I'm you know
I'm coming at this like my background is
sort of as a as a culture snob like a
litte snob like Nabokov Shakespeare
whatever I like me myself read all the
dead greats you know before any modern
writers but I'm really interested to
hear like you know more about your your
take on that divide kind of us in the
publishing industry and in the culture
absolutely well first of all let me song
yeah yeah not for this year let me start
with comics cuz it's interesting you
bring them up you realize of course the
comics are often the leading edge when
it comes to social justice and that
we've had gay characters and gay
marriages and comics and black
characters way before we've had them in
other incarnations of pop culture which
is really cool Wonder Woman case in
point yes right you know Green Lantern I
mean all of these things that's a very
interesting you know association but
what I immediately started thinking
about was of course the divide between
literary and commercial fiction right
and that is pretty much a marketing tool
more than anything else you know
traditionally commercial fiction sells
really well and it's not well written
that's the general belief right and
literary fiction is well written in wins
prizes but nobody gets rich off it I
would argue that both of those are false
I read everything i have read lots of
literary fiction that is extraordinary
and i've also read lots of literary
fiction that is navel gazing and that I
don't think really merits the praise
that it gets sure on the other hand
there is some really bad commercial
fiction over there I am the first person
to tell you that but commercial fiction
does something really extraordinary it
reaches people it reaches the people who
aren't reading
spear and the greats and Aeschylus and
you know all the the traditional
highbrow literature right the translated
polish tomes that are in the new york
times McRae do we get people who are not
reading that will go pick up a piece of
commercial fiction right and here's the
other thing commercial fiction if it's
done right and done well in my opinion
reaches more people but also has the
ability to teach more people because you
can write a book that is about a very
thorny difficult social justice or
social issue and have your reader think
you're telling them a story I'm going
for a ride I get these characters I want
to see what happens there's going to be
a twist is going to be awesome and if
you do your job right they close the
book and they're still thinking about
that issue you know where you're not
going to go and have a reader probably
go and pick up a book like they're not
going to go read the FBI report on
school shooters okay but i did and i use
that when i wrote 19 minutes which is
about bullying and school shooters and
gun culture in the US and people who
read that book were haunted by it
educators still use it when they are
teaching to other educators it's been
used in numerous high schools across the
country and i hear from teachers all the
time saying we never have discussions in
classes like the ones we have with that
book i think that is what commercial
fiction can do it is this backdoor entry
into the issues that are hard to talk
about in reality interesting and I
really do feel that about about this
book about small great things so that's
interesting well that's really
interesting that you say that because
and you have a I know you have a masters
from Harvard and education so you've got
an education background and so you see a
storytelling but also a didactic
function I see commercial my world is
the classroom okay I mean I actually
think i'm still a teacher right it's
just a really really big classes right
and thank God I don't write you know
grades for all of them yeah but it
really is to me that is why I write I
write because I need to understand
something and if I can understand it I
can explain it to other
and so for me the art of fiction is that
it allows a wide swath of people
commercial fiction right it allows
people from all different levels of
reading and corners of the world to
approach a topic that they think is
going to be entertainment right and it
turns out to be education I think what's
interesting so I think bad commercial
fiction or at least what intellectuals
maybe like AO scott think of bad
commercial fiction he certainly watched
his share of horrific movie the
criticism of it the main criticism is
that it is reinforcing the prejudices
and the sort of ignorance that people
already hold right so you're saying the
good commercial fiction can shift that
right I guess literary writers you know
I'm thinking of my darlings you known
avakov or you know someone like that
like they would probably balk at any
kind of like didactic function they
wouldn't want to be seen as educators
they were they'd want their education to
be oblique like their problematizing
your reality and your way of thinking
you want to be seen as chroniclers of
the human condition right and take from
it what you will right you know I i
guess i would like to believe i have a
slightly more active role in the process
right but you know I I think that I
think that's okay i think he what AO
scott is also saying though is you know
that you've got first of all I didn't
know he looked like that yeah but you've
got you've got comedians nowadays who
are in a way the most cutting-edge
intellectual response we have to some of
what's going on in society and I think
of Samantha bee who is my own personal
hero these days right I love her right
and she can get away with saying what
we're all thinking because it's
entertainment well that's right and
comedians cut through that divide I mean
they're like no one would think of
comedians as intellectuals and so it's
very interesting that they're assuming
that role yeah a public intellectual I
mean what I'm arguing is we shouldn't
lump all literary fiction is being
brilliant and we shouldn't love all
commercial fiction as being trashed
right because I don't think that's the
case do you think that the existence of
those categories and the
marketing machinery that is behind them
creates traps for writers that kind of
silo them sometimes in one direction or
another in terms of the structures of
what they're trying to percent because i
can tell you i still remember the day
that i was basically told to choose a
path yeah yeah it was about to ensue
yeah they said you can either revise the
book so it's more like this or you can
revise the book so it's more like this
and I decide I mean I remember
distinctly thinking well I would rat I
know i'm going to write the same book so
i might as well reach more people mm-hmm
you know that was the choice that I made
interesting you know it probably means
I'm gonna go out and let it sit I
probably never will win a national book
award but so be it you know because I do
believe that there are people who are
coming to my books are learning
something and are leaving changed and i
would like to argue that that is the
entire point of fiction in general I
think that's right I agree with that and
and indeed you may well end up because
of this book as kind of the therapist 22
to white people trying to overcome
racism okay they were locked in there
yes it may have cast of the unqualified
servants but yeah it may end up
happening um jodi pico it has been
wonderful talking with you today and
thank you so much for coming on think
again it really has been my pleasure
rakia truly enjoyed it and for the
audience the book is small great things
and i urge you to I ajoo I feel like I
can't say I feel like I have to say if
you're white and yeah that's true yeah
yeah I don't say that because I mean as
a result of our earlier conversation
right now feel I should well it's right
it's interesting you should say that
because I've heard from a lot of people
of color and what they're saying is you
know what the best I could hope for
which is this feels authentic you did
your homework and I'm really touched
that you even wanted to have this
conversation that's the best and the
highest praise I could receive from a
person of color and i'll also say that
you've written what is i've read a bit
about the white supremacist supremacist
movement in america and you've written a
very convincing
me white supremacist character who is
probably interesting to anyone who is
not a white supremacist and don't know
any we hope as many people yes um thank
you so much for coming up oh thank you I
really appreciate it and that wraps up
another episode of think again a big
think podcast if you have three minutes
and you're sitting at a computer and you
want to do a nice thing for this show I
would greatly appreciate it if you would
rate or review us I read pretty much
every review every review scratch that
every review that comes in and some of
them have directly influenced the things
that I'm doing on the show thank you to
the person who told me that it's good
not to say right 600 times while I'm
listening to somebody and thank you to
the other person who suggested that I
let the guests start the conversation
after the surprise clips working on that
working on that anyway if you could rate
us on you know itunes pod being google
play stitcher pod capture whatever
you're listening to wherever you're
listening that makes a very very big
difference to us also next week i'm
joined by the legendary canadian
novelist and short story writer and
essayist Margaret Atwood it's a really
really interesting conversation hope to
see you then
you